---
title: Setting Up WSL2 With Ubuntu 20.04
layout: post
categories: [coding]
tags: [linux, ubuntu, wsl]
---

## Introduction

I eagerly decided to try out WSL2 under the promise of massive I/O performance improvements (e.g. running git commands) and a more native Linux feel. This post goes through how I got set up with WSL2, and in particular how I solved network issues when using a VPN.

See [this article](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/compare-versions#whats-new-in-wsl-2) by Microsoft for a comparison of WSL1 and WSL2.

There are various posts online with instructions for the initial setup of WSL2, e.g. <https://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/how-to-install-wsl2-on-windows-10> - this part all went smoothly for me.


## General Linux/Ubuntu Setup

I'm using Ubuntu 20.04 ('focal'). Note this comes with python3.8 and no python2. Below are the basic setup steps I went through to install packages I regularly use - these are personal to me, and this is mainly intended to serve as an example!

 - Copied in my home directory files:
   - `.bashrc`
   - `.screenrc`
   - `.inputrc`
   - `.profile`
   - `.gitconfig`
   - ...
 - Added to sudoers file to allow running commands under sudo without entering password:
   - Run '`sudo visudo`'
   - Add '`<user> ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL`'
 - Added repositories with '`sudo apt-add-repository <repo>`':
   - [`ppa:deadsnakes/ppa`](https://launchpad.net/~deadsnakes/+archive/ubuntu/ppa) - for Python packages
 - Installed desired packages with '`sudo apt install <pkg>`' (after '`sudo apt update`'):
   - `python3-pip python3-venv` - Python3.8 packages
   - `python2.7 python2.7-dev`
   - `python3.5 python3.5-dev python3.5-venv`
   - ... \[more python versions\] ...
   - `npm` - for web development stuff
   - `pkg-config` - needed for discovery of OpenSSL
   - `ruby-full build-essential zlib1g-dev` - for Jekyll (GH pages)
 - Installed global Python packages:
   - `pip3 install --user pipx`
   - `pipx install virtualenv`
   - `pipx install ipython`
   - `pipx install black`
   - `pipx install isort`
   - `pipx install mypy`
   - `pipx install pylint`
 - Installed global NPM packages:
   - `sudo npm install -g yarn`
   - `sudo npm install -g elm --unsafe-perm=true --allow-root`
 - Set up Rust:
   - `curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh`
   - `cargo install cargo-edit`
 - Installed Ruby gems:
   - `gem install bundler`
   - `gem install jekyll`


## Network Connectivity Problems

### No Connectivity At All

Everything worked fine for me at first, but once I connected to my work VPN (Cisco Anyconnect), WSL lost any network connectivity (unable to ping IP addresses).

After lots of searching online, I've managed to arrive at a somewhat-workable solution. It feels a bit hacky and unfortunately I haven't managed to automate it fully, but at least I'm able to get things working. My solution is effectively the one given in [this GitHub issue comment](https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/4277#issuecomment-636347608).

It seems the main issue here is that the VPN is setting itself as the highest priority in terms of getting network packets, meaning packets never reach WSL. The following commands can be run in Windows PowerShell (in admin mode) to correct this:
```bat
Get-NetIPInterface -InterfaceAlias "vEthernet (WSL)" | Set-NetIPInterface -InterfaceMetric 1
Get-NetAdapter | Where-Object {$_.InterfaceDescription -Match "Cisco AnyConnect"} | Set-NetIPInterface -InterfaceMetric 6000
```


### No DNS

After running the above, I found I was able to ping IP addresses from WSL, but DNS still wasn't working. There's a load more discussion online about this issue (and I've previously hit it in WSL1 too), but my solution is given below.

In WSL, edit `/etc/resolve.conf` to point to the correct DNS server. By default it will point to an IP address it has for the Windows host, but when the VPN is running it should point to the VPN's DNS server.

The correct DNS server IP address can be obtained by running '`ipconfig /all`' in Windows PowerShell (look for entry with "Cisco AnyConnect" in the description).

I managed to boil this down to an alias in WSL (after installing `dos2unix` through `apt`):
```bash
alias powershell='/mnt/c/Windows/System32/WindowsPowerShell/v1.0/powershell.exe'
alias fixdns='powershell -Command "Get-DnsClientServerAddress -AddressFamily IPv4 | Select-Object -ExpandProperty ServerAddresses" | tac | sed "s/^/nameserver /" | dos2unix | sudo tee /etc/resolv.conf'
```

With this in place (e.g. in your `.bashrc`), DNS can be fixed by running '`fixdns`' whenever things break (due to VPN going on/off).


## Other Issues

 - I use [`wsltty`](https://github.com/mintty/wsltty) as my terminal for WSL (would recommend). For some reason it didn't seem to want to start with WSL2, but installing a newer version seemed to fix it.

   After doing this, I found that within `screen` the mouse scroll wheel would map onto the up/down arrows, rather than scrolling in the terminal like it used to. To fix this, I needed this line in my `.screenrc` (the glob star is important):
   ```
   termcapinfo xterm* ti@:te@
   ```

 - When trying to use `screen` I hit "`Cannot make directory '/var/run/screen': Permission denied`", which I fixed using [this workaround](https://github.com/microsoft/WSL/issues/1245#issuecomment-400855065).

 - When connecting to an X11 server (I'm using XLaunch) I had to use the IP address of the Windows host in the `DISPLAY` environment variable. I did this with:
   ```bash
   export DISPLAY="$(cat /etc/resolv.conf | grep nameserver | awk '{print $2}' | head -n 1):0"
   ```

   I also had to select the box in XLaunch to "Disable Server Access Control".

   Unfortunately I haven't managed to get this working with VPN on - I'm unable to even ping the Windows host for some reason.

   What's more, the performance seems to be much worse than it was with WSL1, and in some cases simply insufficient.

 - File watching seems not to work (with '`jekyll serve`' specifically), despite it working fine under WSL1... This is precisely the kind of thing I expected to get better with WSL2, not worse!


## Conclusion

I'm a bit disappointed with this transition to WSL2 not being more of a smooth ride. I think part of the problem is that I've got used to being able to treat Windows and WSL as running on the same machine, whereas WSL2 is more noticeably its own (virtual) machine.

The biggest issues for me are:
 - Issues with network when using VPN, requiring hacks to fix.
 - Degraded cross-OS performance (X-server, and file access).

I may end up switching back to WSL1 because of these problems, but hopefully they will be addressed in WSL2 at some point!
